---
layout: index
hideSectionImage: true
title: Me, myself and I
---

"Passion makes the world go round." Well, in my world it does. Lack of passion
is not something you can accuse me of and I tend to incorporate it in
everything I do. On a professional level I'm passionate about software
architecture, about doing the right thing in the right way.

Professional might be an understatement, because in my not so copious spare
time I also tend to enjoy the company of my MacBooks to work on some fun
project. Most of these are available in the open through my [GitHub
repositories](http://github.com/christophevg).

In 2011, at the age of 37, I decided to return to full time studying at the
University of Leuven, seizing the moment to take a step back and try to find a
(professional) life that I can really be passionate about. After about a year
it became apparant that [embedded systems](/embedded) seemed to lure me their
way.

But, there is more than [computers](/it) in my life. I'm happily married to
Kristien Tambuyzer and our daughter [Eline](http://eline.vg) and baby son
[Arjen](http://arjen.vg) really brighten up every day of our life.

[Cooking](/koken), [digital photography](/fotografie) and [catamaran
sailing](/zeilen) complete the initial picture of my world. Below are a few
more pages that add some more personal details.

I don't keep a blog, am not really active on so called social networks, but I
sometimes feel the need to write down my very personal opinion about
[things](./things).

And please remember: "If you think I'm arrogant, you're missing the point."
