---
title: A-Social Networks
tag: thing
header:
  teaser: /about/images/thumb/social.jpg
  image: /about/images/header/social.jpg
---

_Note: This thing is already quite old and just like social networks, I've also evolved and moved on. So I've annotated the first paragraph to represent my actual current presence on social media. The ideas in this thing... are still, more than ever valid ;-)_

Unlike <strike>some</strike> many among you, I see so called socials networks
as a necessary evil. Yes I have a <strike>Google+ account</strike>, yes I have
a <strike>Twitter account</strike>, yes I even have a <strike>Facebook account</strike>. Today an <strike>Instagram account</strike> is still active.

Let's work ourselves up from the lowest ... I'm on Facebook, also known as the
privacy whore, because for some strange reason, my fellow students think it's
their bread and butter. It seems to be the only way to communicate around the
university. So I'm rather a social hostage than a user. It is also the last
step in my social network stack, where I only forward Tweets to.

Twitter is the new RSS feed that I can use to publish updates to my site. I
still don't see the added value over email for personal communication. And as
far as I can see, most use it that way, Tweeting about things they read online,
adding some nifty remark. So if you don't want to use RSS anymore, ok, I'll
follow.

The only platform that I do appreciate is Google+. Occasionally I post
something to a select group of people, hardly ever something public, because I
have this website for that. Although I'm going to change that, because from now
on I will publish updates to my site publicly on Google+, have them
automagically Tweeted, which will also post them on my Facebook wall. My
website _is_ public and you like your walls, timelines and streams flooded, so
here's some more.

Google+ was fun for a year, but recently it seems that it also contains 90% of
pseudo-poem wisdom that aims to make me feel good about myself. Guess what ...
it doesn't and it doesn't have to. Well maybe it does, because it tells me more
about you than you'd like.

I'm looking forward to the _next_ social network. But then I would love to see
a _real_ social network, one that _is_ social and not asocial like the current
so called ones.

What's social about a network that requires you to connect, request,
follow,...? A social network should in fact connect you by default to every
other member and require you to disconnect, deny, unfollow, ...

The catch is that once you have done that, there is no way back. You just lost
that connection on the network _forever_. Now that would be a real social
network, because it would make you at least think twice about the real value of
social connections. There wouldn't be a race to gain followers, but to keep
them.

The very fact that you would be cut off from someone should also be broadcasted
throughout the network. It tells me more if someone doesn't want to be annoyed
by your ramblings than if someone starts to _follow_ you. Make every update
count, because if you're part of the noise, you're out.

But given the name "social network" is already taken, I'd be glad to call this
the a-social network, where the a-social act of de-friending rules, where less
is more and you're not bothered with house-wife wisdom.
